# Intellectual Property Disclosure Policy

This Ed-Fi Community’s Intellectual Property Disclosure Policy ("Policy”)
applies to each participant and community member ("Member”) of an Ed-Fi
Alliance-sponsored community work group or advisory group (collectively, "Ed-Fi
Community”) affiliated with the Ed-Fi Alliance, LLC, ("Alliance”), a Texas
limited liability company exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The Alliance provides a free
K-12 education Data Standard to school districts and vendors (collectively,
"Adopters”), and provides accompanying tools and materials through a
royalty-free license.

The goals of the Ed-Fi Community include facilitating the adoption,
implementation and use of the Ed-Fi Data Standard and other Ed-Fi tools to
improve the functionality and interoperability of K-12 education data (the
"Ed-Fi Mission”). The purpose of this Policy is to outline the expectations
regarding disclosure of Intellectual Property (defined below) by members of the
Ed-Fi Community.

Each Member is encouraged to share with the Ed-Fi Community Intellectual
Property that furthers the Ed-Fi Mission, subject to the terms below. A Member
shall only share Intellectual Property which is owned by the Member, or which
Member has a license or other permission or authority to share with the Alliance
and Ed-Fi Community.

"Intellectual Property” means any ideas, information, concepts, notes, designs,
specifications, technical information, processes, methods, reports, software,
flowcharts, systems or improvements, enhancements or modifications, assessments
or evaluations, copyrights, patents, trademarks, trade secrets, uniform resource
locators, trade dress, brand features, know-how, moral rights, contract rights
and other proprietary rights of any type under the laws of any applicable
government authority.

For any Intellectual Property disclosed by the Member through the Member’s
participation in the Ed-Fi Community, the Member shall allow the Alliance to
share and distribute said Intellectual Property by the mechanism identified by
the charter of the applicable Ed-Fi Community work group (which shall be either
(a) granting the Alliance a perpetual, worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive
license to use, reproduce, publish, display, create further derivative works and
sublicense to Alliance’s Adopters such Intellectual Property (which the Alliance
shall sublicense); or (b) agreeing that the Alliance shall make such
Intellectual Property available to the Ed-Fi Community via the Apache 2.0
license.)

If a Member wishes to share with the Ed-Fi Community Intellectual Property not
subject to the terms above, the Member shall first contact the Alliance to
discuss the terms under which the Intellectual Property will be licensed to or
shared with the Alliance and/or the Ed-Fi Community.

By participating in the Ed-Fi Community, the Member acknowledges receipt of this
Policy and compliance with its terms.

Last Revision: 03 Dec 2019
