# Extending the ODS / API Data Model

The basic pattern for adding extensions to the Ed-Fi ODS / API data model is to
develop and place customizations into the Ed-Fi-ODS-Implementation directory.
The top levels of this directory mirror the standard functionality that is
contained in the Ed-Fi-ODS directories. When you complete the development for an
extension to the ODS / API data model, re-running the initialize development
environment steps (discussed in the [Getting
Started](../../getting-started/source-code-installation/readme.md) documentation)
will use code generation to automatically add your data extensions to the Ed-Fi
ODS / API.

The Ed-Fi Alliance provides a free tool called the [MetaEd
IDE](/reference/metaed) that allows you to author
and build extensions using a simple language. The MetaEd IDE system can also
assist you by "deploying" the extension customizations to the appropriate
locations in your solution. This means that some of the details covered below
are typically handled by the MetaEd IDE build and deployment processes, but are
nevertheless useful for developers to understand.

Implementing an extension involves making changes to the following components:

* [XSD Schema](#xsd-schema)
* [Database Scripts](#database-scripts)
* [API Metadata](#api-metadata)
* [Removing Extensions](#removing-extensions)

Implementation details for each of these components are described below. In
addition, see the [How To: Extend the ODS / API - Alternative Education Program
Example](../../how-to-guides/how-to-extend-the-ed-fi-ods-api-alternative-education-program-example.md) and [How
To: Extend the Ed-Fi ODS / API - Student Transcript
Example](../../how-to-guides/how-to-extend-the-ed-fi-ods-api-student-transcript-example.md) articles
for a complete walkthrough.

## XSD Schema

The Ed-Fi Data Standard provides XSD interchange schema for a number of data
exchange scenarios. ODS / API Implementers can extend these schema to customize
the data transfer for their particular needs. [MetaEd IDE](/reference/metaed)
makes this process reliable and easy, and so is the recommended approach for
extending XSD for use with the ODS / API.

## Database Scripts

The ODS database scripts are located in their respective
`\Application\EdFi.Ods.Standard\Standard\<Standard-Version>\Artifacts\MsSql\Structure\Ods`
and
`\Application\EdFi.Ods.Standard\Standard\<StandardVersion>\Artifacts\MsSql\Data\Ods`
directories. The Ed-Fi-ODS repository contains the as-shipped, non-customized
data structures, while the Ed-Fi-ODS-Implementation repository contains
customization scripts.

During the initialize development environment (i.e., initdev) process, a set of
standard scripts are run against the database followed by the implementation
scripts. A set of structure scripts creates the database objects, and the
database tables are populated by data scripts. For example, the current school
year is set during this process from scripts in the
`Ed-Fi-ODS\Application\EdFi.Ods.Standard\Standard\<StandardVersion>\Artifacts\MsSql\Data\Ods`
directory.

Matching the same pattern, extension scripts are located
at `Ed-Fi-ODS-Implementation\Application\<YourExtensionProject>\Versions\<ExtensionVersion>\Standard\<StandardVersion>\Artifacts\MsSql\Structure\Ods`
and
`Ed-Fi-ODS-Implementation\Application\<YourExtensionProject>\Versions\<ExtensionVersion>\Standard\<StandardVersion>\Artifacts\MsSql\Data\Ods`
directories.

Extension schema files must be named in this pattern: 0001-description.sql,
where 0001 is incremented for each additional SQL database script file. Each
script is run in numerical order. Scripts that have been previously run in a
given database are skipped (by number). As described above, MetaEd IDE
automatically handles naming and placement of these scripts. If you need to
provide additional database objects to support your customization, they should
be placed here as well.

The [How To: Extend the ODS / API - Alternative Education Program
Example](../../how-to-guides/how-to-extend-the-ed-fi-ods-api-alternative-education-program-example.md)
and [How To: Extend the Ed-Fi ODS / API - Student Transcript
Example](../../how-to-guides/how-to-extend-the-ed-fi-ods-api-student-transcript-example.md)
articles explain how to set up security for your extensions using this
technique. You can also populate descriptors and education organizations using
this technique.

### Populated Sample Data

Your database extension scripts are automatically run against the sample
database (minimal or populated databases). The populated sample database is
retrieved from a NuGet package. However, this database contains education
organizations and descriptors that you may not wish to use. If you wish to
provide your own sample data, the `EdFi.Samples.Ods.*` NuGet should not be
allowed to populate the `EdFi_Ods_Populated_Template` database during the
initialize development environment process.

## API Metadata

This section describes several metadata files used by the code generation to
generate the Ed-Fi ODS / API, some of which may require modification when
extending the ODS / API.

### DomainMetadata.xml

DomainMetadata.xml is an API metadata file used to group the ODS tables of
Domain Entities, Associations, Descriptors, and Enumerations into API-level
aggregates. These aggregates map directly to resources exposed by the REST API.

The file contains a collection of `<Aggregate>` tags, each one defining a single
aggregate. Inside each `<Aggregate>` tag is a list of `<Entity>` tags that
specify the ODS tables associated with the aggregate.

### PredefinedContextMetadata.xml

PredefinedContextMetadata.xml is an API metadata file used to override the
standard pattern for naming columns in the ODS. It is also used to specify where
key unification is related to the naming override. It is expected that the need
for an extension to modify PredefinedContextMetadata.xml will be rare.

The file contains a collection of `<ContextMetadata>` tags, where each one
defines a single naming override. Inside each `<ContextMetadata>` is a
`<ParentElementTag>` that specifies the XSD element representing the parent
entity, an `<ElementName>` tag that specifies the XSD element representing the
field on the parent entity, and a `<Context>` tag that specifies the naming
override. The `<ContextMetadata>` tag can optionally include a
`<UnifiedElementName>` tag that specifies the XSD identity element to which this
rename is related for key unification.

### InterchangeOrderMetadata.xml

InterchangeOrderMetadata.xml is an API metadata file used to indicate data load
order dependencies for Domain Entities, Associations, and Descriptors, grouped
by interchange. InterchangeOrderMetadata.xml is almost always overridden in an
implementation because decisions about security configurations can impact proper
load order. An extension InterchangeOrderMetadata.xml replaces the core version.
It is not additive.

The file contains an ordered list of `<Interchange>` tags that specify the load
order for each Ed-Fi interchange. Inside each `<Interchange>` tag is an ordered
list of `<Element>` tags that specify the load order for each Domain Entity,
Association, and Descriptor in the interchange. Not all interchange elements
need to be declared. Omitted interchange elements are implicitly specified as
being loaded after the declared elements, but in an undefined order.

### EdOrgReferenceMetadata.xml

EdOrgReferenceMetadata.xml is an API metadata file used to indicate which
primary key on an EducationOrganization subclass table in the ODS maps to
EducationOrganizationId. It is expected that the need for an extension to modify
EdOrgReferenceMetadata.xml will be rare.

The file contains a list of `<EdOrgReference>` tags, each of which refers to an
EducationOrganization subclass table. Inside each `<EdOrgReference>` tag is a
`<type>` tag that contains the name of the subclass table, and a `<key>` tag
that contains the name of the column that maps to EducationOrganization.

### PredefinedNoForeignKeyMetadata.xml

PredefinedNoForeignKeyMetadata.xml is an API metadata file used to override the
standard pattern for foreign keys in the ODS. The file specifies where foreign
key relationships between tables should be suppressed. It is expected that the
need for an extension to modify PredefinedNoForeignKeyMetadata.xml will be rare.

The file contains a collection of `<NoForeignKeyMetadata>` tags, each of which
defines a single foreign key suppression. Inside each `<NoForeignKeyMetadata>`
is a `<ParentElementName>` that specifies the XSD element representing the
parent entity, and an `<ElementName>` tag that specifies the XSD element
representing the field on the parent entity that is the reference whose foreign
key on the ODS should be suppressed.

## Naming Conventions for Extensions

Care should be taken with the use of acronyms in extensions. As general
guidance, it is recommended that implementations use the Pascal or CamelCase
naming convention for acronyms over two characters in length. For more
information, see [.NET Framework Design
Guidelines](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/coding-guidelines/framework-design-guidelines-digest.md).

## Removing Extensions

Instructions on how to add Extensions can be found in the article [How To:
Extend the Ed-Fi ODS / API - Alternative Education Program
Example](../../how-to-guides/how-to-extend-the-ed-fi-ods-api-alternative-education-program-example.md).
Once added, Extensions can be removed from a development instance by a generally
inverse process:

1. Remove any Extension Projects in Visual Studio. **Right-click** on the
   Project in the Solution Explorer, select **Remove**.
2. Manually delete the Extension Project files from disk. These will be
   in `<source code root>\Ed-Fi-ODS-Implementation\Application\`.
3. Remove references to the Extension Projects. These references will be in
   your `OwinStartup` class (e.g., `EdFi.Ods.WebApi\Startup\ApiStartup.cs`).
   Remove the using statement and the AssemblyLoader call for each project.

After these steps, Extensions will be removed.
