# Ed-Fi Domains

The scope of education data is large and its organization is complex. Domains
serve to provide views of the Ed-Fi UDM to assist in its understanding and use.
In many cases, a specific Ed-Fi data exchange schema may only deal with data in
a single domain, such as assessment or enrollment. In other cases, it may span
several domains, such as with a student transfer record.

The Ed-Fi UDM is organized into the following 17 base domains, all generally
well-recognized in the K–12 education data space:

A brief description for each domain follows. Model details for each domain,
including key entities, key concepts, and model diagrams are in the [Unifying
Data Model - v5 Model Reference](../model-reference/readme.md).

## Alternative and Supplemental Services

The Alternative and Supplemental Services domain represents a wide range of
programs like education, alternative, extracurricular, supplemental, and early
learning programs.

Sub Domains:

* Federal Programs

## Assessment

The Assessment domain represents the structure of assessments, the educational
standards and objectives measured by assessments, and student assessment
results.

Sub Domains:

* Assessment Metadata
* Student Assessment
* Standards

## Bell Schedule

The Bell Schedule domain represents the class periods and meeting times for a
set of instructional dates.

## Discipline

The Discipline domain represents discipline incidents (i.e., a violation or
offense) and corresponding discipline actions (i.e., the punishment associated
with an incident).

## Education Organization

The Education Organization domain represents the organizational structure,
hierarchy, and other associations of education organizations like schools and
school districts.

## Enrollment

The Enrollment domain represents student enrollment in a school and other
associations with education organizations like school districts.

## Finance

The Finance domain represents the financial information captured in accounts
that may be used to link programs, staff, or classes for funding purposes.

## Graduation

The Graduation domain represents graduation requirements such as credits and
coursework required for graduation, and student outcomes after graduation such
as enrollment in college.

## Intervention

The Intervention domain describes educational interventions and, more generally,
supplemental education content aimed at altering behavior or improving the
understanding of a concept.

## School Calendar

The School Calendar domain represents the instructional days, sessions, and
grading periods defined for a school year.

## Staff

The Staff domain captures information about a staff member's experience,
credentials, and assignment and employment associations.

## Student Academic Record

The Student Academic Record domain represents the various kinds of student
performance reporting, ranging from grades received, to report cards, to a
transcript that contains the final record of grades received.

Sub Domains:

* Gradebook
* Report Card
* Student Transcript

## Student Attendance

The Student Attendance domain represents daily attendance and class period
(i.e., section) attendance.

## Student Cohort

The Student Cohort domain represents a wide variety of collections of students
that are distinct from class rosters or program participants, like graduation
cohorts or a principal's watch list.

## Student Identification and Demographics

The Student Identification and Demographics domain represents the core
information about students and contacts.

## Survey

The Survey domain represents the structure of surveys including the inquiry side
for survey compositions and the response side for survey results.

## Teaching and Learning

The Teaching and Learning domain represents the course catalog, student section
enrollment, and associated staff.

Sub Domains:

* Course Catalog
* Sections and Programs

* [Ed-Fi Unifying Data Model (UDM) Handbook (Latest
    version)](https://schema.ed-fi.org/datahandbook-v510/index.html#/)
* [Ed-Fi UDM Diagram (Latest
    version)](https://github.com/Ed-Fi-Alliance-OSS/Ed-Fi-Standard/tree/main/Models)
    (Visio format, on GitHub)
