---
sidebar_position: 0
---

# Ed-Fi Data Standards

The Ed-Fi Data Standard is the widely adopted, CEDS-aligned, open-source data
standard developed by the educational community for the betterment of the
community. The Ed-Fi Data Standard serves as the foundation for enabling
interoperability among secure data systems and contains a [Unifying Data Model](./udm/readme.md)
designed to capture the meaning and inherent structure
in the most important information in the K–12 education enterprise.

As described in [Ed-Fi Data Standard Versioning and
Releases](./versioning-and-releases.md), the Ed-Fi Alliance typically produces
one to two updates of the Data Standard each year:

* A major version update may come out one year, with breaking changes relative
  to the prior releases.
* The next year's update would only include backward-compatible enhancements and
  clarifications.

This "break-rest" cadence is further described in [Ed-Fi Data And API Standard
Release Cadence](../0-roadmap/cadence.mdx). Also see [Ed-Fi Technology Suite
Supported Versions](../0-roadmap/supported-versions.md) for more information on
version timelines and the release relationships with the Ed-Fi API.

## Version 5.x

Version 5.0 was released in 2023 and again modified in 2024 with minor releases
5.1 and 5.2. This version is intended to support school years 2024-2025,
2025-2026, 2026-2027, and 2027-2028.

➡️ [Documentation for 5.x](/reference/data-standard/)

## Version 4.0

Version 4.0 was released in 2022, following a prior convention of breaking
changes in consecutive years followed by a year with no breaking changes. This
version is intended to support school years 2024-2025, 2025-2026. There is no
plan for a 4.1 or other minor release.

➡️ [Documentation for
4.0](https://edfi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/EFDS4X/overview) (opens in
Confluence)

## Version 3.x

Version 3.0 was released in 2018 and received several updates until 2022,
through version 3.3.1. School year 2024-2025 will be the last year to support
Data Standard 3.3.1; older 3.x releases are already out of support.

➡️ [Documentation for
3.3](https://edfi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/EFDS33/overview) (opens in
Confluence)
