# Scheduling Data Import Agents

There are a few moving parts behind the scenes related to scheduling and FTP Agents. Here is what is physically happening behind the scenes, so that you'll know what "levers to pull":

1.  When you create or edit an FTP Agent on the Agents screens, you are able to define a Schedule for that agent.
2.  However, the background process that performs FTP access and subsequent data loading work, *DataImport.Server.TransformLoad.exe*, does not run *automatically*. When *DataImport.Server.TransformLoad.exe* is executed, it checks the current time vs the defined schedule for the FTP Agents, and determines from that whether work is due. If work is due by that Schedule check, it then contacts the FTP server to copy over any new files, and then performs the work to import them into the ODS per the defined mappings. (In other words, if no Schedule is defined, no FTP imports will take place. Likewise if a Schedule is defined but TransformLoad is never run, no FTP imports will take place.)
3.  For users that want to use FTP Agents for a frequent file drop, then, you may want to set up a Windows scheduled task to run *DataImport.Server.TransformLoad.exe* daily, for instance. That, combined with a Schedule on the Agent, would allow for a "hands off" frequent upload.
4.  However, note that in point 2 above  *DataImport.Server.TransformLoad.exe* contacts the FTP server for "new" files. It is looking for file names that have not been previously imported. The intent here is to protect implementations from an unintentional daily bulk import of the same data over and over again without realizing that's what they'd opted into. So, for users who really do want to use an FTP drop for frequent imports of new CSV content, you'd want to use a naming convention such as a timestamped file name: *2020-07-22-assessments.csv*. This is why the FTP agent allows you to specify a wildcard File Pattern for the files to fetch.