# Student Equity Solution Guide

## About the Student Equity Solution Guide

The Student Equity Starter Kit is a step-by-step guide designed to help local
education agencies, AKA school districts, understand, analyze and take
supportive actions with data to uncover gaps in students’ access and
participation in your school's educational offerings..

This Solution Guide for Student Equity helps Student Information System vendors
take the necessary steps to provide districts with the data needed to power the
starter kit.  

Vendor support for student equity encompasses the following steps:

* **Learn.** The Ed-Fi website has detail on Student Equity, and information
    about how others in the Ed-Fi Community have addressed the problem. Read
    more about how to [Solution
    Guide](https://www.ed-fi.org/solution-guides/ensure-equitable-access-for-students/) on
    [Ed-Fi.org](http://Ed-Fi.org).
* **Develop.** Add Ed-Fi capabilities to your product to support customers
    addressing chronic absenteeism. You will find the [Student Equity Starter
    Kit Vendor Developer
    Guide](./readme.md)
    below.
* **Test.** To fully realize the benefits of the Student Equity Starter Kit,
    and ensure your solution is field ready, we recommend selecting and working
    with an existing district customer to test your integration in a live, Ed-Fi
    implementation of the starter kit. Securing a district customer will allow
    you a reference point for future adoptees of this starter kit. Working with
    a local district agency is not required but it is strongly recommended.
* **Certify.** For vendor organizations that have completed integration with
    the starter kit using the vendor developer guide, apply for the API Domain
    Certification so you may be listed as a verified partner on
    [Ed-Fi.org](http://Ed-Fi.org).

:::note **Zoom out**

Want to know more before you begin? The Ed-Fi website has detail on identifying
detail on identifying whether students have equitable access to academic
programs, experienced teachers as well as equitable discipline and grading
outcomes.  You can also find information about how others in the Ed-Fi Community
have addressed the problem. Link: Read more about [School
Districts](https://www.ed-fi.org/how-to-use-ed-fi/school-districts/) and
[Solution
Guide](https://www.ed-fi.org/solution-guides/ensure-equitable-access-for-students/)
on [Ed-Fi.org](http://Ed-Fi.org).

:::

## Let's Get Started

This developer guide describes the processes for a Student Information System to
develop the functionality in their platform to provide data to an Ed-Fi API to
power the Student Equity Starter Kit.

![Student Equity Vendor Developer Guide](https://edfidocs.blob.core.windows.net/$web/img/getting-started/solution-guides/student-equity-solution-guide/image2021-7-28_12-5-31.png)

The Guide is divided into three sections. We recommend you go through the
following sections and subsections in order, but welcome you to skip forward
when you are already knowledgeable on the topic.

### I. [Getting Data Flowing](./getting-data-flowing/readme.md)

This first section presents the basic information to allow you to interact with
the Ed-Fi API and get some early data flowing in a development setup.

### II. [Understanding Ed-Fi APIs](./understanding-ed-fi-apis/readme.md)

This section explains design features specific to Ed-Fi APIs and how to
integrate with them. After completing this section, you should have the
knowledge to connect your system to an Ed-Fi API and successfully transmit
larger amounts of data.

### III. [Tools and Best Practices](./tools-and-best-practices/readme.md)

This section provides information on tools and best practices to assist in your
development and in the long-term maintenance and health of supporting
organizations using the Student Equity Starter Kit.
