---
title: "Call for Posters: Use Cases for the new Data Management Service Platform"
authors: fuqua
tags: [architecture, tanager]
---

[Tech Congress 2025](https://events.bizzabo.com/techcongress25) is just over a
month away and [Project Tanager Milestone 0.4.0](./2025-03-13.md) has been
reached. Can you help us show off what it is (or might be) capable of?

Think of this as a call for posters. If you're not familiar with academic
conferences and posters... then maybe you can imagine a science fair board. Do
something cool, show it off in a few words and some pictures, and you get a few
minutes to narrate for your audience. Complete your "poster" before
April 17 so that I have time to incorporate it into a slide deck for an April 23
Tech Congress session showing off the Data Management Service in Action.

<!-- truncate -->

:::tip

Accepting prototype concepts without POC implementations! So long as the idea is
architecturally sound.

:::

## Format

Please share up to ~5 slides showcasing your idea. They might look like this:

* Use case / user story.
* Architecture diagram(s), if any additional components are needed to complement
  the reference architecture in Docker Compose.
* Ideally - but not required - screenshots showing a system in action.

Note that a live demonstration will not be possible from the front of the room
during the Tech Congress session. Very short videos may be accepted, though we
don't know in advance how well any audio will work.

## Context

Before getting to the ideas, let's review what is in milestone 0.4.0:

* Two ASP.NET applications:
  * Data Management Service (DMS):
    * [Ed-Fi Discovery API](/reference/data-exchange/api-guidelines/design-and-implementation-guidelines/api-design-guidelines/discovery-api)
      * Including Open API specifications.
    * [Ed-Fi Resources API](/reference/data-exchange/api-guidelines/design-and-implementation-guidelines/api-design-guidelines/resources/)
      * Data Standard 5.2 with TPDM 1.0.
    * [Ed-Fi Descriptors API](/reference/data-exchange/api-guidelines/design-and-implementation-guidelines/api-design-guidelines/ed-fi-descriptors)
  * DMS Configuration Service:
    * Mostly compatible with the [Admin API 2.2 specification](https://github.com/Ed-Fi-Alliance-OSS/Ed-Fi-API-Standards/blob/main/api-specifications/admin-api/admin-api-2.2.0.yaml).
* Storage:
  * PostgreSQL for modifications
  * OpenSearch or Elasticsearch for queries.
* Event streaming in Kafka.
* Authorization (see note):
  * Client authorization (you're allowed to use the API) via Keycloak.
  * Resource authorization (you're allowed to access this endpoint, using claim sets).
  * Document authorization, via namespaces (you're allowed to access a specific document).
* Docker Compose files orchestrating local deployment of all of these resources.

:::note

Admittedly, the authorization work is incomplete from a feature parity standpoint. And
the resource authorization via claim sets is going to change in the next milestone. For
now, you can export from Admin API and re-import that into the DMS Configuration Service
for some basic resource authorization.

:::

## Ideas

Here are some ideas that might stir your imagination.

* Observability w/streams
  * Attendance notifications.
  * Expected record count notifications.
  * Level 2/3 validation.
* Stream → Data lake.
* Stream → ODS-like database.
* Stream → synchronization to another Ed-Fi API.
* Machine learning (in OpenSearch?).
* Serverless execution using cloud functions.
* Deployment with tools like Kubernetes, OpenShift, TerraForm.
* Using AWS Aurora or Azure Cosmos DB serverless PostgreSQL.
* Writing an alternative persistence or query layer (e.g. drop in MongoDB instead of PostgreSQL).
* UI sitting on top of the Configuration Service.
* Alternative Open ID Connect provider.

## Next Steps

1. Contact Stephen Fuqua ASAP if you are thinking of developing a "poster".
   1. We can schedule a brief phone call to discuss, if that helps.
2. Work on the concept.
3. Submit slide content by your preferred method **by April 17**. Note: they will eventually go
   into a PowerPoint deck.
