---
title: '📢 Announcing! ODS/API v7.3.1 and and MetaEd 4.6 Release'
authors: mayya
tags: [ods-api, data-standard, metaed, release]
---

We are excited to announce the release of **Ed-Fi ODS/API v7.3.1** and **MetaEd
4.6**. ODS/API v7.3.1 adds support for **Data Standard 6.0**, alongside existing
support for versions **5.2** and **4.0**. Below is a summary of what’s new.

<!-- truncate -->

## Data Standard 6.0

Data Standard 6.0 was announced last week. For an overview of what’s included in
this major update, see the [Data Standard 6.0](/blog/2025-11-14.md) blogpost.

## ODS/API 7.3.1

The ODS/API 7.3.1 includes support for Data Standard 6.0, along with Data
Standard 5.2 and 4.0. Key updates include the addition of domain metadata to the
OpenAPI spec and new configuration options to show or hide domain information in
swagger and to exclude unused domains for improved readability. This release is
intended to be **non-breaking**, enabling a smooth upgrade path from 7.3 to 7.3.1
for the next school year. See [What's New in this
Release](/reference/ods-api/whats-new/whats-new-in-this-release) for detailed
information.

## MetaEd 4.6

This is the first MetaEd release since the project became open source earlier
this year. Version 4.6 primarily introduces support for Data Standard 6 and
ODS/API 7.3.1, with no major user-facing changes for those building data models
in MetaEd. See the [release notes](/reference/metaed/releases/4.6.0) for MetaEd
4.6.

## What's Next

ODS/API v7.3.2 will build on v7.3.1 and include an upgrade to .NET 10. If you
are currently on v7.3, we recommend upgrading for the next school year. You can
track upcoming work upcoming work in [Roadmap
Boards](https://github.com/orgs/Ed-Fi-Alliance-OSS/projects/1) in GitHub. Also
see the [technology roadmap](/reference/roadmap/) for tips on how to use this
board.
