---
title: Announcing Ed-Fi Admin Console 1-RC1
authors: hoekstra
tags: [tools, release]
---

We are excited to announce the release of **Ed-Fi Admin Console 1-RC1** (Release Candidate 1)!

## What is the Ed-Fi Admin Console?

The Ed-Fi Admin Console is an open-source tool designed to simplify the administration of Ed-Fi ODS/API instances in  multi-instance and multi-tenant  environments with ODS/API 7. It provides a modern, React/TypeScript-based UI and .NET Core worker processes for robust, scalable management of Ed-Fi technology stacks.

The source code was granted by The Texas Education Exchange, which runs as "Tech Console" as a large implementation for many districts, and modified to work for other agencies to use.

<!-- truncate -->

## Key Features

* **ODS/API Instance Management:** Easily list, provision, copy, and delete ODS/API instances.

* **Application & Vendor Management:** Securely manage keys and secrets for vendors and applications.

* **Health Check Microservice:** Monitor instance health and summary counts for major entities.

## What’s New in 1-RC1?

* First public release candidate for the Admin Console 1.0 series.
* Integrated Health Check Microservice for near real-time instance status.
* Instance Management Worker Process for automated instance operations.
* Improved documentation and reference configurations.
* Enhanced QA automation and Docker support.

## Getting Started

Admin Console source code and documentation is available at the GitHub repo Ed-Fi-Admin-Console <https://github.com/Ed-Fi-Alliance-OSS/Ed-Fi-Admin-Console>.

## Feedback & Contributions

We welcome your feedback and contributions! Please file issues in the Ed-Fi Technology Roadmap(<https://github.com/Ed-Fi-Alliance-OSS/Ed-Fi-Technology-Roadmap/issues>) or pull requests on GitHub, and join the Ed-Fi community to help shape the future of the Admin Console.
