---
title: 'You Spoke, We Listened: Adjustments to the Ed-Fi Technology Roadmap'
authors: fuqua
tags: [roadmap]
---

:::info

TL;DR: extending ODS/API 7.3 support additional year to 2028-2029; next ODS/API 7.3 release fall 2025, with Data Standard 6.0; Data Management Service release subsequently delayed until Q1 2026. FAQ.

:::

At Tech Congress 2024 [we announced](https://www.ed-fi.org/blog/cloud-native-ed-fi-technology/) the creation of a new software platform for data exchange using the Ed-Fi Data Standard: the Data Management Service (DMS), which will replace the Ed-Fi ODS/API. The goals for the new system were to create a platform for accelerated innovation, optimized for the cloud, which will better support large-scale deployments. All in service to the mission of unlocking data to drive student success.

<!-- truncate -->

We shared an ambitious [roadmap](https://docs.ed-fi.org/reference/roadmap/api-faq/):

- A release candidate for early adopters and pilot testing.
- A production version in time for the 2026-2027 school year.
- Formal retirement of the legacy application at the end of the 2027-2028 school year.

This is a bold transition. The ODS/API has powered local use cases and state reporting across the country since 2011. At Tech Congress 2025 (April 22–23), the community engaged deeply with the DMS vision. It was featured in three dedicated sessions, opening and closing remarks, and countless hallway conversations. The response was a mix of genuine excitement and understandable concern.

This is not a small undertaking. Some organizations have spent millions of dollars building reporting and analytics infrastructures based on the ODS/API. At present, the new system architecture looks different from the old one, raising important questions:

- How much work will be needed to migrate to the new system?
- What skills will be required to operate it?
- Will it be cost-effective?

From day one, the Alliance has committed to providing a bridge between the new and the old systems, easing the migration path. This remains a critical goal. We also recognize that the potential cost savings of the new platform are highly dependent on the deployment model and staff skillset. There is much work to be done to prepare for this transition, both by the Alliance and by community members.

For this reason, we are announcing changes to the technology suite roadmap:

- Ed-Fi ODS/API 7.3.1 will now be released in Q4 2025 (moved up from Q1 2026).
- Support for ODS/API 7.3.x is extended through the 2028-2029 school year (2028-2029) to give more time for the transition from one system to the other.
- Adding Data Standard 6.0 to ODS/API 7.3.1, which will continue to support Data Standard versions 4.0 and 5.2.

The production-ready release of the Data Management Service is now targeted for the first quarter of 2026. This gives the development team time to work on the ODS/API release and time to refine the new system architecture, based on community feedback, performance testing results, and third-party architectural review.

We’re excited about what lies ahead and grateful for the community’s engagement and partnership. Together, we’re building the future of education data infrastructure—one that’s more scalable, flexible, and aligned with the goal of unlocking data to drive student success.

:::note

Additional resources:

- [Ed-Fi ODS/API and Data Management Service FAQ](/reference/roadmap/api-faq)
- [DMS release candidate 1 is now available for testing!](/blog/2025/07/12/)
- The [Project Tanager workgroup](https://edfi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/GOV/pages/217350145/Project+Tanager+Technical+Workgroup) has been the primary means for the Ed-Fi Alliance tech team to regularly engage with the community on feature development and milestone releases. If you have not been part of the workgroup and would like to join, please reach out to Vinaya Mayya, Stephen Fuqua, or any other member of the Ed-Fi Alliance.

::::
