---
title: '📢 Ed-Fi Admin App 4.0 Released: A Complete Redesign for the Next Generation'
authors: [hunter, jimenez]
tags: [admin-app, release]
---

The Ed-Fi Alliance is pleased to announce the initial release of Ed-Fi Admin App 4.0. This new application replaces the legacy Ed-Fi ODS Admin App and was developed in partnership with Education Analytics.

<!-- truncate -->

## Key Features

- Ed-Fi Admin App 4 can manage multiple deployments.
  - Previous version were able to manage just one.
- New architecture includes a User Interface and a Back-End exposed in the form of an Api.
- Manage client credentials, vendors, applications, database instances, and API health across diverse user roles and deployment models.
- New system requires that you install Admin API for every deployment of the ODS/API, and then separately install
  (just one time!) the new Admin App 4.
- Support for Microsoft SQL Server and PostgreSQL.
- Differential user access and viewable claimsets for precise permission control.
- Optional Yopass integration for secure, one-time sharing of client credentials.
- Supports both ODS/API 6.x and 7.x in a single interface.
- Friendly and modern user interface.

## Try It Out

If you are migrating from previous versions, then:

1. Uninstall the previous Admin App application.
   1. Make sure all tables under the `adminapp` schema on the **EdFi_Admin** database have been deleted.
2. Follow the [installation instruction](/reference/admin-app/system-administrators/installing) for the new version.

Here is the [System Administrator Installation and Configuration Guide](/reference/admin-app/system-administrators/)

## What's next

For more information, see the [User's Guide](/reference/admin-app/user-guide/).
