# Requirements - Product Availability Information

The data provider MUST provide information on the availability of all
functionality that was used to complete certification. That information MUST
include both the geographical areas where the certified functionality is
available and version information that applies to those geographies. This
information is submitted by using the form provided below.

The Alliance will publish information from this statement as part of the
certification record, so that the Ed-Fi community can understand availability of
the certified functionality.

# Format

* * *

The information MUST be submitted by the data provider seeking certification
using the following form. Information from this form will be published as part
of the product's certification record.

**Requirements**

* Geographic information MUST be (at a minimum) precise enough to allow any
    local education agency operating within the United States to determine if it
    is or is not within the specified geography.
* Version information MUST be for versions generally available on the market
    (i.e., version information MUST not include development or future versions).
    Note that for Ed-Fi certification generally, only functionality actually
    available in the market can be certified, not functionality under
    development.
* Non-specific information MUST NOT be included (e.g., â€œPlease contact us for
    availability information").

# Rationale

* * *

The main goal of collecting availability information is to enable users of Ed-Fi
certification records to determine if they have access to certified product
functionality, and for providers to clarify their customers or users
expectations on availability.

In the initial years of Ed-Fi certification, a number of issues emerged from the
lack of clarity on where and if an education agency could get access to data
exchange functionality defined by Ed-Fi standards. In some cases, an education
agency took a dependency on certified functionality based on a certification
record only to later discover that they did not have access to that
functionality.

Data providers likewise experienced customer misunderstandings based on
certification records, and expressed a need to clarify where and when the
certified functionality was available.

:::warning
The Ed-Fi Alliance recommends that agencies involve their data providers early
in the process of project planning, and communicate with those providers about
the goals of agency projects. Certification records should not be used as a
proxy for communication with providers whose systems will be critical to project
success.
:::
