---
sidebar_position: 7
---

# 4.0.0

Release date: 25 Apr 2023

## Overview

With this release, the MetaEd IDE moves from the
[now-retired](https://github.blog/2022-06-08-sunsetting-atom/) Atom text editor
to Visual Studio Code ("VS Code").

## Installation

* [Upgrading to MetaEd 4.x](../ide-user-guide/upgrading-to-metaed-4x.md)

## Changes

In addition to all of the work that went into moving to VS Code:

* The HTML handbook includes a new property "JSON Element Name" that translates
  the MetaEd model name to the name that will be expressed in the API documents.
  Example below; the highlighted words show the reason for this update: the
  model property `LanguageUse`  on entity `Language`  becomes simply `uses`  in
  the JSON schema / API model.

* Removed the plugin generator: plugins are not widely used, and the code
  generator relied on an old set of JavaScript packages with known
  vulnerabilities. While those vulnerabilities do not appear to be a threat to
  MetaEd, we decided there was no value to keeping the code around.

## Bug Fixes

* ApiModel DomainMetadata table comparison not using overlap-collapsed table
  name
* ApiModel.json does not include decimal max and min values
* ApiModel.json does not include integer max and min values
  * The MetaEd language defines support for MinValue and MaxValue on Decimal and
    Integer data types - but support for these was never built into MetaEd or
    the ODS/API code generation process. As of version 4.0.0, the MetaEd output
    will include these values. However, the ODS/API will not utilize the
    additional information until the 7.0 release later in the summer of 2023. If
    you have need for early access, please submit a Tracker ticket to request
    instructions on recompiling an older version of the ODS/API with these
    updates.
