---
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Applying for a Badge

## Requirements

To be eligible for any Ed-Fi badge, the following requirements must be met. Note
that requirements for specific badges are described in [Available
Badges](./available-badges/readme.md).

### Partner Program

Vendors must submit a request to join the Partner Program by providing the
information and commitments requested in this **[online
form](https://forms.gle/N57icQ29Xgx4Kz8W8)**. Direct any questions to [Sean
Casey](mailto:sean.casey@ed-fi.org).

### Availability

The Ed-Fi related functionality that is the basis for the badge must be widely
available in the K12 market. "Widely available" means that at minimum the
functionality is available for use in an entire US state or purchasable or
acquirable by a minimum of 100 school districts. The functionality must also be
part of the core product functionality or a standardized option - i.e., it must
not require customized development work to make function, but it can require
configuration. Availability information must be recorded in the badge
application and will be published in the [Registry of Ed-Fi
Badges](./registry-of-ed-fi-badges.mdx).

### Actual Usage

The Ed-Fi related functionality that is the basis for the badge must be in
actual usage in a school district. The usage may be a pilot that is planned for
production, but must not be a proof-of-concept, "spike" or other transient
project not designed and intended to become part of the infrastructure of an
education agency.

### Product Updates

The Ed-Fi related functionality that is the basis for the badge must be
maintained across product updates for the duration of the badge. The Alliance
may ask for a re-verification of product functionality at any time if there is a
question on if the functionality is available and working.

### Use Core Data Entities

The Ed-Fi related functionality that is the basis for the badge must employ
Ed-Fi core data entities –  i.e. those in the Ed-Fi Unifying Data Model (latest
version is here: [Ed-Fi Unifying Data
Model](https://edfi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/EFDS31/pages/23855205/Ed-Fi+Unifying+Data+Model))
– as part of its core value to users. The integration functionality can include
extended elements, but the value to end uses must be clear and apparent if the
extensions were not present.

### Changes to Badge Requirements

The Ed-Fi Alliance may at any time change the requirements for a badge. Such a
change will not necessarily require a reapplication , but it does mean that a
system that previously received a badge may not be able to meet the requirements
the next time the product applies.

## Application Elements

### 1. Application Form

The application includes basic information about the product and functionality
seeking a badge.

[Ed-Fi Badge Application](https://edfi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/EDFIBADGE/pages/20611181/Applying+for+an+Ed-Fi+Badge?preview=/20611181/20611456/Ed-Fi%20Badge%20Application%20(3).docx)

### 2\. Data Model Integration Information

This requirement only applies to the [Ed-Fi API Consumer
Badge](./available-badges/ed-fi-api-consumer-badge.md) and [Ed-Fi
ODS Platform Consumer
Badge](./available-badges/ed-fi-ods-platform-consumer-badge.md).

The product must supply a list of all Ed-Fi data elements that are part of the
badge-related functionality. These elements must be employed within the badge
product to produce some kind of output that is of value to product users and
consistent with the core value provided by the product.

For the format, the mapping must

* be in a spreadsheet format
* in header information, state the version numbers of the Ed-Fi standards or
    products which apply to the data elements (e.g. "The data elements listed
    are for Ed-Fi Data Standard 3.1" If the product has multiple version
    support, it is permitted to default these to the most recent Ed-Fi version
    supported.
* for the Ed-Fi data elements, use the exact terms from either the Ed-Fi Data
    Handbook, the Ed-Fi API element name, or the Ed-Fi ODS database element name

### 3\. Implementation Verification

The Alliance must receive at least one customer verification that the narrative
(from the application form) is accurate and the integration is in use.  This
form must be submitted by an education agency that is a member of the Ed-Fi
community.  You can find the verification form
[here](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScAA-zTBOabLepUwPIj2mR6jIC66P07_Q9Ba5s3OQl5gX-XcA/viewform?usp=sf_link).

## Review and Validation

When all application elements are complete, the Ed-Fi Alliance will reach out to
schedule an online, synchronous inspection of the product functionality. The
technology provider will be asked to share their screen and demonstrate the
product functionality that is the basis for the badge.

When review and validation is complete, the badge will be awarded. Badges are
good for 2 years.

In the event that it is unclear if a product qualifies or not for the badge, the
Alliance will refer the decision to the [Ed-Fi Governance Advisory Team
(GAT)](https://edfi.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/GOV/pages/20317448/Governance+Advisory+Team).
The Alliance reserves the right to provide any information from the badge
application to the GAT in order to make this decision.
