# Badging Requirements for Technology Providers

To be eligible for any Ed-Fi badge, the following requirements must be met. Note
that requirements for specific badges are described in [Available Ed-Fi
Badges](./available-badges/).

## Partner Program

Vendors must submit a request to join the Partner Program by providing the
information and commitments requested in this **[online
form](https://forms.gle/N57icQ29Xgx4Kz8W8)**. Direct any questions to [Sean
Casey](mailto:sean.casey@ed-fi.org?subject=Partner%20Program).

## Availability

The Ed-Fi related functionality that is the basis for the badge must be widely
available in the K12 market. "Widely available" means that at minimum the
functionality is available for use in an entire US state or purchasable or
acquirable by a minimum of 100 school districts. The functionality must also be
part of the core product functionality or a standardized option - i.e., it must
not require customized development work to make function, but it can require
configuration. Availability information must be recorded in the badge
application and will be published in the [Registry of Ed-Fi Badged Products and
Services](./registry-of-ed-fi-badges.mdx).

## Actual Usage

The Ed-Fi related functionality that is the basis for the badge must be in
actual usage in a school district. The usage may be a pilot that is planned for
production, but must not be a proof-of-concept, "spike" or other transient
project not designed and intended to become part of the infrastructure of an
education agency.

## Product Updates

The Ed-Fi related functionality that is the basis for the badge must be
maintained across product updates for the duration of the badge. The Alliance
may ask for a re-verification of product functionality at any time if there is a
question on if the functionality is available and working.

## Use Core Data Entities

The Ed-Fi related functionality that is the basis for the badge must employ
Ed-Fi core data entities –  i.e. those in the [Ed-Fi Unifying Data
Model](/reference/data-exchange/udm.md) – as part of its core value to users.
The integration functionality can include extended elements, but the value to
end uses must be clear and apparent if the extensions were not present.

## Changes to Badge Requirements

The Ed-Fi Alliance may at any time change the requirements for a badge. Such a
change will not necessarily require a reapplication , but it does mean that a
system that previously received a badge may not be able to meet the requirements
the next time the product applies.
